README.md, before:

# 🌍 Race Around The World

An interactive two-player trivia game where players race across the globe answering AI-generated questions about history, geography, and culture — now featuring a bold **Neobrutalism** design and shareable online rooms powered by Socket.IO.

## 🎮 Game Overview

**Race Around The World** is a turn-based trivia game built with React, TypeScript, and Google's Gemini AI. Two players compete to be the first to reach their destination by correctly answering location-specific trivia questions.

### How It Works

1. **Setup**: Choose your starting city, destination, and player names
2. **Race**: Players take turns answering trivia questions about their current location
3. **Progress**: Answer correctly to move forward; incorrect answers keep you in place
4. **Win**: First player to reach the destination wins!

The game features:

- **20 global cities** spanning all continents (New York → Tokyo → Sydney and more)
- **AI-generated trivia** powered by Gemini 2.5 Flash for unique questions every game
- **Interactive world map** rendered with D3.js and TopoJSON
- **Private online rooms** with invite codes so friends can play remotely in real time
- **Smart question buffering** to ensure smooth gameplay without API delays

## 🛠️ Tech Stack

- **Frontend**: React 19 + TypeScript
- **Build Tool**: Vite 6
- **AI Integration**: Google GenAI SDK (`@google/genai`)
- **Map Rendering**: D3.js + TopoJSON (loaded from CDN)
- **Realtime**: Socket.IO 4 (client) + Express-based Socket.IO server
- **Styling**: Tailwind CSS (via classes)

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- **Node.js** (v18 or higher recommended)
- **Google Gemini API Key** ([Get one here](https://aistudio.google.com/app/apikey))

### Installation

1. **Clone the repository**

   ```bash
   git clone <your-repo-url>
   cd race-around-the-world
   ```

2. **Install dependencies**

   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

3. **Set up environment variables**

   The client expects `process.env.API_KEY` for Gemini requests and optionally `VITE_SOCKET_URL` if your realtime server is not on the default host machine (`{protocol}//{host}:4000`). When `VITE_SOCKET_URL` is omitted, browsers automatically target whatever IP served the app, which keeps LAN play simple.

   ```bash
   # .env.local
   API_KEY=your-gemini-key
   VITE_SOCKET_URL=http://localhost:4000
   ```

4. **Start the Socket.IO server**

   ```bash
   npm run server
   ```

   The server listens on port `4000` by default. Leave it running while you play online games.

5. **Run the Vite development server**

   ```bash
   npm run dev
   ```

   > Tip: `npm run dev:full` runs both the Socket.IO server and Vite watcher concurrently.

   Open [http://localhost:5173](http://localhost:5173) in your browser.

### Build for Production

```bash
npm run build
npm run preview
```

## 📁 Project Structure

```text
race-around-the-world/
├── App.tsx                  # Main game logic & state management
├── components/
│   ├── GameSetup.tsx        # Initial setup screen
│   ├── GameBoard.tsx        # Interactive world map & game UI
│   ├── Landing.tsx          # Mode selector (local vs online)
│   ├── OnlineLobby.tsx      # Socket.IO room creation/join flow
│   ├── QuestionDisplay.tsx  # Question presentation & answer handling
│   └── WinnerModal.tsx      # Victory screen
├── services/
│   ├── geminiService.ts     # AI integration (Gemini API calls)
│   └── socketService.ts     # Thin Socket.IO client helper
├── constants.ts             # Location data (20 cities)
├── server/
│   └── index.ts             # Express + Socket.IO realtime server
├── types.ts                 # TypeScript interfaces
└── index.tsx                # React entry point
```

## 🎯 Key Features & Implementation Details

### Question Management

- **Preloading**: Questions are fetched 2 locations ahead (`PRELOAD_AHEAD = 2`)
- **Buffer**: Maintains minimum 2 questions per location (`MIN_QUESTION_BUFFER = 2`)
- **Uniqueness**: Tracks used questions via Set to prevent repeats within a game
- **Queue**: `Map<string, TriviaQuestion[]>` keyed by location name

### AI Integration

- **Model**: Uses `gemini-2.5-flash` for fast, cost-effective generation
- **Schema Validation**: Enforces strict JSON schema with 4 options per question
- **Error Handling**: Gracefully skips turn if question generation fails
- **More Info**: Optional AI-powered explanations for correct answers

### Map Rendering

- **Global Dependencies**: D3 and TopoJSON loaded from unpkg CDN
- **Projection**: Mercator projection centered on world view
- **Dynamic Path**: Curved race path drawn between selected cities
- **Player Pins**: Custom SVG components with distinct colors

### Realtime Rooms (Socket.IO)

- **Mode selector**: `Landing.tsx` lets players choose Local play or Online Rooms
- **Room lifecycle**: `server/index.ts` tracks active rooms, enforces a two-player limit, and cleans up on disconnects
- **Host authority**: The host device runs the trivia logic and broadcasts sanitized game state via `host:state`; guests submit actions (ready, answer, more info, play again) through `client:action`
- **Invite codes**: Five-character, consonant-heavy codes are generated server-side and surfaced in the lobby + board headers for easy sharing
- **Graceful exits**: Leaving a room, switching modes, or hitting “Play Again” sends the appropriate socket events so every client returns to the lobby in sync

## ⚠️ Known Considerations

- **API Key Security**: Currently the API key is exposed client-side. For production, move AI calls to a backend server.
- **Network Dependency**: Map data fetched from `unpkg.com` at runtime. Won't work offline.
- **Question Quality**: AI-generated questions vary in difficulty. Consider adding difficulty levels or curation.
- **Socket server scope**: `server/index.ts` stores room metadata in memory. Deploy it close to your users and add persistence if you need longer-lived rooms or analytics.

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Areas for improvement:

- Move Gemini API calls to backend/serverless function
- Add difficulty settings
- Implement question caching
- Add sound effects and animations
- Create mobile-responsive layout

## 📄 License

MIT License - feel free to use this project for learning or building your own games!

## 🔗 Links

- [Google Gemini AI](https://ai.google.dev/)
- [AI Studio App](https://ai.studio/apps/drive/1H0bgtPglK6o-h5vIjf9lmeDnHx749nOL)
- [D3.js Documentation](https://d3js.org/)

---

Built with ❤️ using React, TypeScript, and Google Gemini AI

Commit message:

feat(ui): implement avatar system for player customization
Add comprehensive avatar selection and display functionality throughout the game. Players can now choose custom avatars during game setup and online lobby creation, with avatars displayed on the game board and in player cards. Includes new avatar gallery component, avatar pin rendering on the map, and enhanced visual presentation with background styling. Server-side support added for avatar synchronization in multiplayer games.

README.md, after:

# 🌍 Race Around The World

An interactive two-player trivia game where players race across the globe answering AI-generated questions about history, geography, and culture — now featuring a bold **Neobrutalism** design and shareable online rooms powered by Socket.IO.

## 🎮 Game Overview

**Race Around The World** is a turn-based trivia game built with React, TypeScript, and Google's Gemini AI. Two players compete to be the first to reach their destination by correctly answering location-specific trivia questions.

### How It Works

1. **Setup**: Choose your starting city, destination, and player names
2. **Race**: Players take turns answering trivia questions about their current location
3. **Progress**: Answer correctly to move forward; incorrect answers keep you in place
4. **Win**: First player to reach the destination wins!

The game features:

- **20 global cities** spanning all continents (New York → Tokyo → Sydney and more)
- **AI-generated trivia** powered by Gemini 2.5 Flash for unique questions every game
- **Interactive world map** rendered with D3.js and TopoJSON
- **Private online rooms** with invite codes so friends can play remotely in real time
- **Smart question buffering** to ensure smooth gameplay without API delays

## 🛠️ Tech Stack

- **Frontend**: React 19 + TypeScript
- **Build Tool**: Vite 6
- **AI Integration**: Google GenAI SDK (`@google/genai`)
- **Map Rendering**: D3.js + TopoJSON (loaded from CDN)
- **Realtime**: Socket.IO 4 (client) + Express-based Socket.IO server
- **Styling**: Tailwind CSS (via classes)

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- **Node.js** (v18 or higher recommended)
- **Google Gemini API Key** ([Get one here](https://aistudio.google.com/app/apikey))

### Installation

1. **Clone the repository**

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/DarkoKuzmanovic/race-around-the-world
   cd race-around-the-world
   ```

2. **Install dependencies**

   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

3. **Set up environment variables**

   The client expects `process.env.API_KEY` for Gemini requests and optionally `VITE_SOCKET_URL` if your realtime server is not on the default host machine (`{protocol}//{host}:4000`). When `VITE_SOCKET_URL` is omitted, browsers automatically target whatever IP served the app, which keeps LAN play simple.

   ```bash
   # .env.local
   API_KEY=your-gemini-key
   VITE_SOCKET_URL=http://localhost:4000
   ```

4. **Start the Socket.IO server**

   ```bash
   npm run server
   ```

   The server listens on port `4000` by default. Leave it running while you play online games.

   If you see an error like `EADDRINUSE` and the server fails to start, another process is occupying the port. Two simple options:

   - Change the port for this run (PowerShell):

     ```powershell
     # Temporarily run the server on port 4001 for this session
     $env:PORT = 4001
     npm run server
     ```

   - Kill the process that is using the port (PowerShell):

     ```powershell
     # Find the PID listening on port 4000
     netstat -ano | findstr :4000

     # Suppose the PID is 1234, kill it
     Stop-Process -Id 1234 -Force
     ```

   Note: The server now includes a fallback attempt — if port 4000 is busy it will automatically try the next port(s). If your server starts on a port other than 4000, set `VITE_SOCKET_URL` so the web client connects to the correct realtime server, e.g.:

   ```powershell
   $env:PORT = 4001
   $env:VITE_SOCKET_URL = "http://localhost:4001"
   npm run dev:full
   ```

5. **Run the Vite development server**

   ```bash
   npm run dev
   ```

   > Tip: `npm run dev:full` runs both the Socket.IO server and Vite watcher concurrently.

   Open [http://localhost:5173](http://localhost:5173) in your browser.

### Build for Production

```bash
npm run build
npm run preview
```

## 📁 Project Structure

```text
race-around-the-world/
├── App.tsx                  # Main game logic & state management
├── components/
│   ├── GameSetup.tsx        # Initial setup screen
│   ├── GameBoard.tsx        # Interactive world map & game UI
│   ├── Landing.tsx          # Mode selector (local vs online)
│   ├── OnlineLobby.tsx      # Socket.IO room creation/join flow
│   ├── QuestionDisplay.tsx  # Question presentation & answer handling
│   └── WinnerModal.tsx      # Victory screen
├── services/
│   ├── geminiService.ts     # AI integration (Gemini API calls)
│   └── socketService.ts     # Thin Socket.IO client helper
├── constants.ts             # Location data (20 cities)
├── server/
│   └── index.ts             # Express + Socket.IO realtime server
├── types.ts                 # TypeScript interfaces
└── index.tsx                # React entry point
```

## 🎯 Key Features & Implementation Details

### Question Management

- **Preloading**: Questions are fetched 2 locations ahead (`PRELOAD_AHEAD = 2`)
- **Buffer**: Maintains minimum 2 questions per location (`MIN_QUESTION_BUFFER = 2`)
- **Uniqueness**: Tracks used questions via Set to prevent repeats within a game
- **Queue**: `Map<string, TriviaQuestion[]>` keyed by location name

### AI Integration

- **Model**: Uses `gemini-2.5-flash` for fast, cost-effective generation
- **Schema Validation**: Enforces strict JSON schema with 4 options per question
- **Error Handling**: Gracefully skips turn if question generation fails
- **More Info**: Optional AI-powered explanations for correct answers

### Map Rendering

- **Global Dependencies**: D3 and TopoJSON loaded from unpkg CDN
- **Projection**: Mercator projection centered on world view
- **Dynamic Path**: Curved race path drawn between selected cities
- **Player Pins**: Custom SVG components with distinct colors

### Realtime Rooms (Socket.IO)

- **Mode selector**: `Landing.tsx` lets players choose Local play or Online Rooms
- **Room lifecycle**: `server/index.ts` tracks active rooms, enforces a two-player limit, and cleans up on disconnects
- **Host authority**: The host device runs the trivia logic and broadcasts sanitized game state via `host:state`; guests submit actions (ready, answer, more info, play again) through `client:action`
- **Invite codes**: Five-character, consonant-heavy codes are generated server-side and surfaced in the lobby + board headers for easy sharing
- **Graceful exits**: Leaving a room, switching modes, or hitting “Play Again” sends the appropriate socket events so every client returns to the lobby in sync

## ⚠️ Known Considerations

- **API Key Security**: Currently the API key is exposed client-side. For production, move AI calls to a backend server.
- **Network Dependency**: Map data fetched from `unpkg.com` at runtime. Won't work offline.
- **Question Quality**: AI-generated questions vary in difficulty. Consider adding difficulty levels or curation.
- **Socket server scope**: `server/index.ts` stores room metadata in memory. Deploy it close to your users and add persistence if you need longer-lived rooms or analytics.

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Areas for improvement:

- Move Gemini API calls to backend/serverless function
- Add difficulty settings
- Implement question caching
- Add sound effects and animations
- Create mobile-responsive layout

## 📄 License

MIT License - feel free to use this project for learning or building your own games!

## 🔗 Links

- [Google Gemini AI](https://ai.google.dev/)
- [AI Studio App](https://ai.studio/apps/drive/1H0bgtPglK6o-h5vIjf9lmeDnHx749nOL)
- [D3.js Documentation](https://d3js.org/)

---

Built with ❤️ using React, TypeScript, and Google Gemini AI
